# Sorting Algorithms

We start this by developing an array test bed to use in support of our study of basic sorting algorithms. We’ll build a class for array data and functions that encapsulates some of the normal array operations: inserting new data, displaying array data, and calling the different sorting algorithms. Included in the class is a *swap()* function we will use to exchange elements in the array.
```
    function CArray(numElements) {
        this.dataStore = [];
        this.pos = 0;
        this.numElements = numElements;
        this.insert = insert;
        this.toString = toString;
        this.clear = clear;
        this.setData = setData;
        this.swap = swap;

        for (var i = 0; i < numElements; i++) {
            this.dataStore[i] = i;
        }
    }

    function setData() {
        for (var i = 0; i < this.numElements; i++) {
            this.dataStore[i] = Math.floor(Math.random() * (this.numElements + 1));
        }
    }

    function clear() {
        for (var i = 0; i < this.dataStore.length; i++) {
            this.dataStore[i] = 0;
        }
    }

    function insert(element) {
        this.dataStore[this.pos++] = element;
    }

    function toString() {
        var retstr = "";
        for (var i = 0; i < this.dataStore.length; i++) {
            retstr += this.dataStore[i] + " ";
            if(i > 0 && i % 10 == 0){
                retstr += "<br />";
            }
        }
        return retstr;
    }

    function swap(arr, index1, index2) {
        var temp = arr[index1];
        arr[index1] = arr[index2];
        arr[index2] = temp;
    }
```

Here is a simple program that uses the CArray class (the class is named CArray because JavaScript already has an Array class):
```
    var numElements = 100;
    var myNums = new CArray(numElements);
    myNums.setData();
    print(myNums.toString());
```

The output from this program is:
```
    90 16 16 100 3 17 14 97 70 65 73
    59 21 99 60 4 30 96 77 39 8
    70 86 83 13 35 24 23 70 86 94
    62 99 47 2 18 66 55 90 97 79
    96 18 29 13 91 76 78 89 79 3
    55 64 74 4 94 96 1 14 98 94
    79 17 74 63 18 60 38 75 28 20
    84 8 34 93 4 7 39 5 2 7
    12 66 88 0 88 77 74 90 52 95
    98 4 26 30 79 64 63 32 40
```

### GENERATING RANDOM DATA

You will notice that the *setData()* function generates random numbers to store in the array. The random() function, which is part of the Math class, generates random numbers in a range from 0 to 1, exclusive. In other words, no random number generated by the function will equal 0, and no random number will equal 1. These random numbers are not very useful, so we scale the numbers by multiplying the random number by the number of elements we want plus 1, and then use the floor() function from the Math class to finalize the number. As you can see from the preceding output, this formula succeeds in generating a set of random numbers between 1 and 100.

## Basic Sorting Algorithms

The fundamental concept of the basic sorting algorithms covered next is that there is a list of data that needs to be rearranged into sorted order. The technique used in these algorithms to rearrange data in a list is a set of nested for loops. The outer loop moves through the list item by item, while the inner loop is used to compare elements. These algorithms very closely simulate how humans sort data in real life, such as how a card player sorts cards when dealt a hand or how a teacher sorts papers in alphabetical or grade order.

* [BUBBLE SORT](01_BUBBLE_SORT)
* [SELECTION SORT](02_SELECTION_SORT)
* [INSERTION SORT](03_INSERTION_SORT)

[TIMING COMPARISONS OF THE BASIC SORTING ALGORITHMS](TIMING_COMPARE_BASIC_SORTING)

## Advanced Sorting Algorithms

These sorting algorithms are generally considered the most efficient for large data sets, where data sets can have millions of elements rather than just hundreds or even thousands. The algorithms we study in this chapter include Quicksort, Shellsort, Mergesort, and Heapsort. We discuss each algorithm’s implementation and then compare their efficiency by running timing tests.

* [THE SHELLSORT ALGORITHM](04_SHELLSORT)
* [THE MERGESORT ALGORITHM](05_MERGESORT)
* [THE QUICKSORT ALGORITHM](06_QUICKSORT)

[TIMING COMPARISONS OF THE Advanced SORTING ALGORITHMS](TIMING_COMPARE_Advanced_SORTING)
